Good afternoon, everybody.
Is everyone having a great WWDC thus far?
That's what I like to hear.
If you'd like to make a digital book,
you've come to the right place.
This is session 515, HTML, CSS,
and DOM for Book Authors.
I'm Edward O'Connor,
a web technology engineer on the
Safari and WebKit team here at Apple.
So iBooks.
iBooks supports three kinds of books.
First, flowing books, like novels,
which consist primarily
of text and images,
fixed-layout books.
which allow the book designer precise
control over the placement and
position of everything on the page.
And MultiTouch Books,
exceptionally easy to
author with iBooks Author.
So rich,
beautiful books your readers will love.
So three formats, one core set of
technologies for all three.
It's web technology.
In MultiTouch Books, you can build rich,
interactive widgets with HTML for
flowing and fixed-layout books.
EPUB provides the structure of your book,
but the contents are HTML, CSS,
and JavaScript,
the core web technologies.
So if you're not a web developer,
or if the last time you looked at HTML,
the blink tag was the new hotness,
you're in the right place.
We're going to take a
look at the key parts,
the core bits of web technology that
are essential to building a book.
technology for making
great digital books.
So let's get started.
I thought we could take
a look at a document that
hopefully you've all heard of.
So I took a copy of the US Constitution,
exported it to HTML,
and dropped it into an EPUB.
And this is what it looks like.
We've got a little bit of work to do to
make this be a really great-looking book.
So in a few minutes,
you'll know everything you'll need
to make it look like this instead,
something far more
compelling for your readers.
We'll start by looking at the
basic structure of your document.
So the tool I used basically just
gave me automatic line breaks.
This is the BR tag in HTML.
For iBooks to format your book nicely,
we first need to tell it what
each part of our content is.
HTML provides a variety of elements.
For basic page elements,
so you have the P element
for your paragraphs,
various heading elements for
your headings and subheadings,
and so on.
And there are many great
tutorials and references online
that you can use to look up the
basic structural HTML elements.
And as you can see,
we've immediately gotten from iBooks
much better formatting by default.
So as I flip through this book,
I'm seeing that each of my paragraphs
has this extra space in between,
and the first lines aren't indented.
This is the default
presentation of text on the web,
but it's not what you expect in a book.
In a book,
you typically have your paragraphs
right next to each other,
and you indent those first lines.
To do this in web technology,
we're going to use what's
called a style sheet.
CSS
stands for Cascading Style Sheets,
is the language we use to describe
what our content should look like.
So first, we'll link to our style
sheet from our HTML.
So what goes in the style sheet?
Well,
you need to identify the parts of the
content you'd like to alter and then
provide iBooks with commands that will
describe how you'd like it to look.
In this case, we want to affect the
indentation of every paragraph.
So we use what's called
an element name selector.
In this case, I've named the P element.
This will match every
paragraph in our book.
And as you can see, we've got this nice
indentation on our first lines.
But one of the key differences
between digital books and print is
that your reader can change the font
size they use to read your book.
So if we do that,
we'll find our nice-looking indent
from before doesn't look so nice now.
Well, what happened?
We've used a unit of length, the pixel,
that's relative to the screen,
not to the size of the font.
You really want to express things
like indentation in terms that
are relative to the font size,
so that when your user changes the font,
it still looks great.
There are several such thought-relative
units available in CSS.
One of them is the M, or EM.
The name comes to us
from print typography.
It used to refer to the
width of the uppercase M.
And now it's a little more complicated,
but that'll do.
So once we've done this,
we change the font size,
our indentation looks great.
So now that we've taken care of that,
we still have these spaces
between our paragraphs.
To fix this,
we need to learn about how elements
have space around them in CSS.
There are two kinds of space
that you need to worry about:
margin and padding.
And this is because all elements
can have a border put around them.
Margins are the space around the border,
whereas padding is the
space inside the border.
By default, paragraphs in HTML get
a top-and-bottom margin.
So to remove that,
we simply set margin zero in our CSS.
So this is already looking
a lot more like a book and
a lot less like a web page.
It's common in print for the
first paragraph after a heading
or subheading to not be indented,
that only subsequent
paragraphs should be indented.
We can achieve this in CSS,
by using what's called
a sibling selector.
So remember,
our element name selector picked
out every paragraph in the document.
The sibling selector
says,
"Give me all the elements that follow
this other element." So here we've said,
"I'd like only the paragraphs that
follow another paragraph directly in
the document." So now our indentation
is only applied where we'd like it.
Something else you may have noticed
is that iBooks is automatically
hyphenating your content.
This is really great.
And it's dynamic.
When the user changes the
font size or orientation,
The hyphenation will
update automatically,
and your text will
continue looking great.
Automatic hyphenation is wonderful,
but sometimes you need to override it.
Maybe you're writing a technical
manual and you're using a
technical word that's not in the
default hyphenation dictionary.
You can use what's called
the soft hyphen character,
shy, to manually specify
each hyphenation point.
Conversely,
you might want to disable hyphenation.
This is very common with headings.
You can use the epub-css
property to disable hyphenation.
Another common structural element
of flowing books are quotes.
Unfortunately, there aren't any quotes
in the Constitution,
but I'm sure you can imagine
in the hot Philadelphia summer,
People scribbled various
notes in the margin,
and via extensive historical research,
I found one such note.
So as you can see,
the element we use in HTML for
quotes is called blockquote.
And it gets, by default,
a little bit of margin on the
left and right to distinguish
it from the surrounding text.
One thing you might want to do
here is restrict the width of
a quote or many other elements.
This is very easy to do in CSS.
You simply use the width property.
Here I've chosen to use a percentage.
This allows for the element
to take up the same amount of
space on the screen on an iPad,
an iPhone, or an iPod Touch.
Once you've restricted the
width of an element like this,
you might want to center it on the page.
And we can do this with a special
kind of margin called an auto margin.
So before we had one value that
we were giving to a margin.
When you give it two values,
the first specifies the vertical
margin and the second the horizontal.
So here, we've given it auto for
our horizontal margin.
iBooks knows that the element
takes up 75% of the width,
so it automatically allocates
the remaining 25% on either side.
This quote still appears to
be part of the main document,
but really we want it to be off to the
side as a pull quote or margin quote.
We do this in CSS by floating an element.
The float property does several things.
It removes the element from the
main flow and moves it off to
either the left or the right.
So as you can see,
the Article 1 heading is following
immediately after the preamble as if
there weren't anything in between.
Floating an element also causes
the rest of the content to
flow around it automatically,
so you don't have any ugly overlaps.
Now that we have our
quote off to the side,
we could use a variety of
CSS properties to make it visually
distinct from the main text.
And there are many great tutorials
and references online for the various
CSS properties at your disposal.
One very common thing to do
is to use a different font.
So let's take a look a little bit at
how to work with fonts in your books.
So the first thing to think about
here is that your reader can use a
different font than you specified.
iBooks supplies a font menu
with several great options.
So if you're looking for a
font to specify for your book,
you might first look at iBooks List.
These are all fonts that are designed
for readability on the screen.
But you're not limited to these fonts.
iOS comes with many other fonts.
One of my favorites is...
Charter is very readable,
but even better would be Markerfelt.
I'm pretty sure this is exactly what
the Founding Fathers had in mind.
So this brings up a good point.
If you want to change a font,
you should always have
your readers in mind.
Readability is the goal here.
In this case, marker felt might not be a
suitable font for your body text.
Maybe it's better just for headings
or other runs of large text.
You're not limited to the
fonts available on the system.
You can include a custom font that
you have a license for in your book.
You simply include the
font file in your EPUB,
and then you tell iBooks about this font
by using what's called an @fontface rule.
This looks a little more complicated
than the CSS we've seen already,
but it's pretty straightforward.
It contains two parts.
We use the font family
property to name the font,
and then the source property
to specify the font file.
And then in our CSS,
we just refer to it like
any other system font.
So in this case,
I've loaded what's called FelEnglish,
which is a revival of an
18th century manual typeface,
because I thought it's
a historical document,
and an appropriate historical
typeface might fit with it.
But I'm using Charter for my
body for better readability.
Custom fonts typically
come in multiple files,
so your italic will be in a
separate file from the bold,
et cetera.
To load multiple files for the same font,
you just use multiple @fontface rules.
And you use the font style
and font weight properties
to specify which is which.
Now remember,
your reader can change the font
they're using to read your book.
If you specify a custom font,
how do you make sure that your user
can get back to that custom font
if they've chosen a different one?
In your Apple Display Options file
inside your EPUB,
you include the specified fonts option,
and this enables the original
item in the font menu.
When I think about custom
fonts and the Constitution,
I think of this sort of iconic
first page with this ginormous "We
the People," a very bold statement.
So I'd like to bling
up our preamble a bit.
Now, before, in our CSS,
we've selected whole classes of elements,
all of the paragraphs, et cetera.
To select just the preamble,
I can give it a class in my markup
and then refer to that class
from CSS using a class selector,
which is just the class
name with a dot prepended.
So I've made it a lot bigger,
made it italic.
It's starting to look kind of nice.
It's very, very common in books to
want to style a line,
or the first line or the
first letter of a paragraph.
But if the user changes the font size,
what's included on that
first line will change.
Fortunately,
we have a first line and a first
letter pseudo-element in CSS.
And this will dynamically update
and always match what's in
that first line as orientation
changes and font size changes.
I still want that "We the People"
to really kind of pop out,
though.
There wasn't any element just surrounding
"We the People," so I added one.
And I'm using a similar
class selector like before.
Now unlike print,
you're not going to get charged extra
for using different colored ink.
So just don't make it really ugly.
Think about it.
So that's looking pretty nice.
Flowing books are more than just text.
The judicious use of excellent images
can really improve the look of your book.
Working with images in iBooks is really,
really easy.
So here's a portrait of the
signing of the Constitution.
Let's pop that right in there.
We use the image element in HTML.
to put an image in our markup.
Takes two attributes.
Source attribute
specifies the image file,
and the alt attribute specifies
alternative text that will
be used instead of the image.
Remember,
many of your readers cannot see the
images you've included in your book.
And if an image is
worth a thousand words,
you can probably spare 20
or 30 to describe each of
your images appropriately.
One thing I haven't done here,
I haven't told iBooks anything about
how to size or place this image.
That's because iBooks goes to
great lengths to figure out an
appropriate size for your image,
to make sure it won't break across pages,
and that sort of thing.
It does this across devices.
This looks great on the iPhone, too.
And it didn't have to do anything.
You might want to control the
width or placement of your image.
The best way to do this in iBooks
is to put the image in a container
and then style that container.
So here I've used the same width and
auto margins from before to center and
give a little space around my image.
At this point, we can start to have fun.
I decided to put a little bit
of a shadow behind my image.
In CSS, there's a box shadow property.
Which takes four arguments.
The first two are the
offset from the image,
then a bit of a blur,
and finally the color of the shadow.
Another thing to keep in mind when
working with images and books is
that your reader can change the theme
they use to read your book in iBooks.
I do this all the time.
My favorite is the night theme.
Actually,
my wife's favorite is the night theme
because I can't put the book down.
I've been in bed for an hour,
and the light's off,
and I'm keeping her up.
So I turn on the night theme,
and hopefully the book still looks great.
In this case, though,
Something's not right.
This image has a white background.
And in normal theme, it looked great.
In the night theme, not so much.
This is an easy problem to avoid.
Simply use an image with
a transparent background.
This will continue to look
great in normal mode and
in the night theme as well.
So now we've looked at dealing with
the basic structure of our documents
and how to work with custom fonts
and how to include images in them.
But digital books are so much
more than a static recreation
of print onto the screen.
So let's go beyond print and look
at some of the things that you
can only do in a digital book.
We'll start by looking at animating
content in a fixed-layout book.
A fixed-layout book
is almost like a sequence of web pages.
Each page is its own HTML document.
So for each page,
we have to tell iBooks how
big the page expects to be.
We do this by defining
a viewport in our HTML,
and then we set our body
dimensions to match that in CSS.
Be sure to set zero margins
on your body so that the
dimensions will actually match.
So now we have this blank page,
a blank canvas.
We can tell any story we want.
So I thought we could create
a story about a sheep.
But not just any sheep.
This sheep has an
overriding goal in life,
to help children sleep by jumping fences.
Over and over and over again,
as many times as it takes.
So we'll need a fence.
In fixed-layout books,
you'll typically have a
background image on each page.
To set a background image in CSS,
you use the background property.
You point to the image, and that's it.
Make sure the dimensions of
your image match the viewport
dimensions that you've set.
Okay, so we've got our field, our fence.
Let's put our sheep on there.
This is just like before.
You use the image element in your markup,
and there we have our sheet.
There's a bit of a problem, though.
It looks like our sheet might
be falling from a great height.
And I'm a little worried.
We need to put them on the ground.
So to position elements
like this on the page,
we can use absolute positioning.
In CSS, you set your position
property to absolute,
and then you use the top, right, bottom,
and left properties to position
the element wherever you'd like.
So there he is, safe on the ground.
Let's give him some friends.
So I have an image of a flock of sheep,
positioned exactly like the first sheep.
But where did the sheep go?
The flock is sitting on top of them.
When you use absolute positioning
to position elements on the page,
they can overlap.
So to control the
stacking of your elements,
you can use the z-index property.
It's very simple.
The bigger z-index value wins.
So by setting the sheep z-index
higher than my flock's z-index,
I've put it back on top.
This is all you need to know to position
and stack every element on your page,
but we still haven't made the move.
To do this, we'll use what's called
keyframe animations.
A keyframe animation
is a series of steps.
Each step is a keyframe.
You say, "I'm going to create a keyframe.
This far through,
this is how things should look.
This much farther,
And so on.
So I thought we could start
by defining an animation
Let's have our sheep just
walk across the screen.
We'll get to what goes in
our keyframes in a bit.
To tell our sheep to animate,
we use the animation name property,
and name -- we give it the same
name that we gave our keyframes.
We have to tell iBooks how
long the animation should go.
We do this with the
animation duration property.
In this case, I've said one second.
And you can control the timing
of your animation with the
animation timing function.
"Well, what does that mean?"
This is the scariest slide.
So the easiest one is a
linear timing function.
And this simply says--
You know,
at 50% of the way through our animation,
we should be 50% through our keyframes.
So in a one-second animation,
a half a second will be at
50%. Another common timing
function is called ease,
and this provides a gentle
acceleration at the beginning
and a deceleration at the end,
which will make your
animation look really smooth.
There are several other predefined
timing functions in CSS,
but you might want to describe
your own custom timing function.
You can also do this.
Okay.
So we've wired up our animation.
We've told it how long it will take.
But what goes in those keyframes?
Well, if you think about it,
When you want to animate things,
you typically want to move
them around on the canvas.
You can make them bigger or smaller,
maybe rotate them.
We can do all of these
things with one CSS property,
the transform property.
To use the transform property
to move something around,
you can use the translate function,
which takes an X and a Y offset
and scoots your element
along that offset.
To make something bigger or smaller,
you use the scale transform.
In this case,
a scale of two doubles the size.
And to spin or rotate things,
you guessed it, the rotate transform,
which takes an angle
And does the rest.
So to cause our sheep to
walk across the screen,
we'll use the translate transform.
We'll just need two
keyframes at the start.
We don't want to translate it all.
And at the end,
we will have fully translated
to our destination.
And there you have it.
To show you how to use keyframe
animations and CSS transforms to cause
our sheep to actually jump that fence,
I'd like to invite up Adele Peterson.
Thanks, Ted.
Hi, I'm Adele Peterson.
We're going to start with an animation
very similar to the one that Ted just
showed you guys in the slides,
and then I'll show you how to make
it fancier and then eventually
get the sheep to jump the fence.
So you guys see the
beginning wiggle there?
There he goes.
And then he kind of scoots.
OK.
So let's go back to our machine.
We're going to drop in
a few more keyframes.
Okay, so now I added a few more.
Again, we're continuing to
translate along the x-axis,
and we're doing that
wiggle back and forth.
Look at him go.
All right, all right.
Okay.
And finally,
we're going to jump the fence.
Okay, so here we now have an extra
parameter in our translate function.
So by 80%, we're going to translate
in the Y direction 200 pixels up.
And we've straightened our rotation
back out to zero so that the sheep is
on firm footing as he makes his jump.
Okay.
Come on, Brucie, you can do it.
And there he goes.
All right.
Back to you, Ted.
So we've seen how to animate
elements on the page.
One of the other things we can do
in digital books is make use of
multimedia like audio and video.
I don't have much to tell you about
this because there isn't much to say.
It's very easy.
Just like we use the image
element to include an image,
we can use the audio or video
element to include audio or video.
They both take a source attribute
just like the image element.
The video element also takes a
poster attribute which specifies an
image to be used as a placeholder
like so until the user has hit play.
You specify the controls attribute
so that the user has controls to
play and pause and scrub your media.
And just like that, you've got...
Great sound and video in your book.
Sometimes you'd like your book
to do something that you can't
express in an animation alone.
You'd like to change the
content on the page dynamically.
One way we could do this,
or one reason we might want to do this,
is to count the number of times Bruce the
Sheep has jumped the fence already.
This thing can get outrageously
large and somewhat depressing.
Why isn't Iris asleep yet?
Well, how would we achieve
this with web technology?
JavaScript is the programming
language of the web,
and we can use it in our books as well.
Everything in your HTML is
exposed to JavaScript in what's
called the Document Object Model,
or DOM.
So all of your elements have some kind
of corresponding JavaScript object
that you can manipulate from a program.
You can add or remove elements,
modify their contents.
So if we want to count each
time the sheep jumps the fence,
we're going to need to get some kind
of message about when this happens.
And in the DOM,
we have what are called DOM events.
And these are just messages that
happen as something changes.
Keyframe animations cause several
different kinds of events to happen.
The animation start event happens when
the animation initially kicks off.
The animation iteration event
happens at the end of every
iteration of that animation.
And finally,
the animation end event happens
when the animation stops.
Sadly for Bruce,
this animation is never going to stop.
So what we want to do is we
is used the DOM first to get a reference
to the image that represents our sheep.
The getElementById method does
this very straightforwardly.
You just pass it the ID of that element.
Next, we'll try to listen for the
animation iteration event.
And each time we get it,
we'll update that count by
using some DOM manipulation.
So the next iteration, our count goes up.
It was kind of ugly that it said zero.
The Romans didn't even
have a concept of zero.
So maybe that's a bit too
much for a children's book.
So we could hide the zero and
wait until the first iteration
happens to then display our count.
To hide and show elements in CSS,
you use the display property.
So in this case,
I've put a class on my count.
I've used that class
to hide the elements.
And then from the DOM,
I can remove that class to
cause the count to appear.
HTML5 provides a very convenient
classless API for the manipulation
of classes on elements.
You can add or remove classes.
You can check to see if a class is
there or toggle the presence of one.
By using classes like this,
we can describe different states
of our animation and the dynamic
behavior of our book with meaningful
names which makes it much easier to
work with for you as the book author.
So in this case,
we can simply call classless.remove
and give it our class to cause--
Our count to be shown.
So I'm going to invite Adele back up,
and she's going to have a little bit of
fun with making our sheep do a bit more.
Here's Adele.
Thanks, Ted.
So I'm going to quickly walk
you through adding the counter
that Ted just showed you,
and then we're going to add a
super realistic sound effect.
OK.
So--
Let's take a look at our JavaScript here.
So here we've added an event
listener to our window to listen
for the DOM content-loaded event.
So when the web page, or in this case,
the page of the book, first loads,
we'll end up calling this init function.
We'll do our initialization.
So here is where we
have our sheep element.
So actually, before I go farther,
Let's add in our HTML for the counter.
Okay, so pretty simple.
We have our paragraph and our counter,
and here's that class that Ted mentioned,
and that's how we're going to
control the appearance of this class.
Okay, so back to the JavaScript.
All right,
so we have this initialization function,
and the first thing that we're going
to do is to add that event listener for
the WebKit animation iteration event.
So this fires at the end of
each iteration of our animation.
When that happens,
we're going to call this
updateCount function.
So updateCount...
is fairly simple as well.
We increment our jumped sheep,
we grab our counter element,
and we set the text content
property of the counter to
the number of jumped sheep.
Okay, now we're going to go
and hide the counter.
Let's see, where's my... Okay, so...
We're just going to drop in some
really basic CSS to set that zero
class to display none to hide it.
And then in our JavaScript,
in update count,
when we have reached the first iteration,
We're going to use the class
list API to remove that class.
Okay, so let's switch over
and see how that looks.
We're continuing to count,
so that's good.
Okay, so now let's add our super
realistic sound effect.
So this may defeat the purpose of
trying to get your kid to go to sleep,
but it's kind of cool anyway.
So you may have to learn how to
build a mute button into this later.
Okay, so again,
let's go back to our XHTML,
and we'll add our audio element.
Now, this is a little different from
the example that Ted showed you
on his slides because it doesn't
have a controls attribute.
And the reason for that is we don't
want the user to control this media.
We want to control
ourselves in JavaScript.
So I'm going to show you how to do that.
So we are going to add a little more
code to our initialization function.
We're getting the audio element by ID,
using getElementByID,
and we're calling load
on that audio element.
This is just so the audio file
actually gets loaded and is ready
to play when it's time to play.
We're going to add our function
to actually play the audio.
And here,
when we actually play the sound effect,
we're going to play it on a slight delay.
So this is so if it starts playing
at the beginning of an iteration,
we can actually play
it a little bit later,
maybe around the time that the
sheep is jumping the fence.
And then every time we iterate,
I'm sorry, let's see.
Every time we iterate,
we'll call play sound effect.
Okay, so there's actually a
problem with this code.
Every time you iterate,
you're going to play the sound effect,
which happens on a delay.
This actually means that the first
time the sheep jumps the fence,
you're going to miss
getting the sound effect.
That's because this event,
this animation iteration event,
happens at the end of each iteration.
So we're going to also add an event
listener for WebKit animation start and
also start playing the sound effect then.
Okay, so I think we are set
up to make this work.
Let's switch over.
Bah-ha-ha-ha.
All right, back to you, Ted.
Well, what have we learned today?
First off, it's exceptionally easy
to make a great-looking,
flowable book using just
a couple of CSS properties
and some very basic markup.
Secondly,
you have very fine-grained control
over layout and the appearance of
things in a fixed-layout book using,
again, just a little bit of CSS,
And it's also very easy to add
some fairly complex enhancements,
such as animation and multimedia.
Remember,
This is all just web technology.
And there's an amazing
amount of material out there.
It's all very applicable
to making great books.
There have been many related
sessions here at WWDC this year,
several of which have already occurred.
If you missed them,
the videos will be posted very soon.
Tomorrow morning, there's a session on
accessibility in books,
which is going to be awesome.
I'm really looking forward to it.
And then on Friday,
there's actually a repeat
of the Building Books with
iBooks Author session.
It should be a great
session if you miss it.
I think it was Monday.
No, sorry, Tuesday.
And of course, for more information,
you can contact Vicki Murley,
our Safari Technologies Evangelist.
You can participate in our developer
forums at devforums@apple.com.
Thank you so much.